In this video let us talk about functions, function is a piece of program code which performs a specific
task, maybe a small task but it performs it completely, it takes some input as parameters and return the result
as a return value. functions are useful for procedural programming or modular programming.
If you write a function then we can reuse it in the program, multiple times we can use it and even
we can use it in other programs and also we can share it with other programmers and the collection of functions
we call it as a library like C C++ languages provides a lot of build-in functions in their library and
we commonly used them for making the programming easy.
Let us see how we write the functions and what is the idea behind writing functions.
see every c++ program must have a main functions so I'm writing void main even we can write int main
also here but I'm writing void main.
So we know that this is the entry point of our program and a work program executed from here only.
And what ever we want.
I write down the code here.
Suppose I'm writing the code here.
Now just listen this carefully if I have a very big program I have some 10000 lines of code.
Then everything I'm writing inside main function only, then if you have a single function then this style
of programming is called monolithic programming. And
If you write the program like this, let us see what the problems we face.
First problem if there is a error in a single line then it's an error in the entire program.
Or entire main function.
Second problem, 10000 line of code I cannot finish it in one hour or one day it might take a few
days and through out the time I should remember everything.
Then only I can make changes or write new lines in the program.
So memorizing the whole program.
Then the third thing.
How many people can write this one single main function with everything.
10000 lines here.
Only one person can write.
We cannot make it as a team work and more than one people are working on the same main function.
Not possible.
So work cannot be distributed in a team.
Now the  fourth problem.
when this program becomes very big.
It may fit in some computer memories.
It may not fit some in some of the memories.
It depends.
Depends on the size and depends on the hardware contribution of the computer on which you are running.
So these are a few problems due to monolithic programming, monolithic means everything is a single unit.
The complete program as a single unit.
So what we prefer is.
Let us break the program into pieces, manageable and small pieces and re-usable pieces.
Then the benefit is I can develop it piece wise so I can concentrate on one piece at a time.
One piece of code at a time.
Second thing the pieces can be distributed among the team of programmer and they can develop some set
of pieces and we can collect them together and make it as a single program.
And definitely the main will be integrating all of them directly or indirectly then one more thing,
when we are on some computer.
Then we can load and unload the pieces that we require.
So we don't have to have a very large sized memory on the computer in which we are running, solve the problems
are solved.
So this is nothing but modular programming.
This can be done using functions.
So let us see how to write a function, first of all function should have a name.
Function name, function name must be there.
Then it should have parameter list or also called as argument list what all
the parameters it is taking, then function should have return type.
What value it is returning, it should have the data type of that value here.
So functions are identified by their name and this becomes input to the function.
And this is the output of a function, A function can take 0 or more input means it may not take any
input
Also, it depends how you are writing a function what purpose you are writing.
Function, then it may return or may not return a value but it can return at most one value just
one value a function cannot return multiple values but it can take multiple values as input output
should be only one, if the function is not returning any value then the return type should be void
now one more thing, how the function name should be.
The rules for giving function names are the same as the rules of giving variable name.
How you give variable name same way.
Same rules you should follow for giving function name also.
Now let us write one example function and use it in our main function.
I will write
main function
now here I will write one function, void display the function name is  display and it is not taking
any parameters so I can leave it empty.
this is the function name.
This is parameter list.
Nothing is there.
Return type is not returning anything, then
Inside this I would write Cout hello.
just This is a wishing message. now from here.
This is the way we call a function display, so the function will be called so inside the main function
I'm not doing anything just calling the main function.
So let us see how it runs.
See when the main function starts it will come to this line so it will go here and execute this and
return back and continue the main function.
So if I have a few lines here and after this also.
So the first line and the second line, and the third line and fourth line so after first line it will go to second
so second line
It will execute this return back and it will continue with third and fourth line.
Now one important thing that inside the functions avoid user interaction.
That is a cin and cout.
It's a bad function.
You should avoid using cin cout inside the function.
So the function should not interact.
So the idea behind that I would tell you.
Suppose there is an organization so main is a manager or the owner of a business and this is his employee
this plays as his employee.
So who called to the employee, manager has called the employee here for some work.
So who should contact or who should communicate with the clients.
of a business, the customers of a business, manager or the owner should interact, so cin cout
communication with the client.
So communication client is whose client here, user.  so through main functional function only the communication with
the user should be done.
All other functions must be just supporting the main function so they should not have cin cout in them.
This is a good practice so you should avoid it, but for explanation purpose I may be writing cin cout
OK, just for explanation purposes, but when you really develop the application don't have interactivity
inside the functions, let me write a few more functions and show you. i will write a  function for adding t2o numbers
simple functions so add is the name of a function, it has to take two parameters you can give any
data type here but to make it simple for understanding I'm always taking integer types so two integer
values I have given an names as X and y now after adding themit is going to return the result.
The result is going to be of typing int only, so return type of a function is also integer.
Now here what I would do is I will declare one variable Z.
Then I will say z assign  X plus Y.
I'm just making it a little lenghty then say  return Z.
So the value of x and y is that and that as it is stored in Z and Z the value is returned.
let us write the main function and use it.
So I will write.
Void main, just to seperate them I will draw a line here I will have two variable a as value 10
and b value as a 15 then also I will have some variable c. then I will say add i will send
these two values A and B and whatever the value is returning this would be done value z.
I will take it in C, then  here I will say scout sum is
C that's it.
So this is a main function which is calling this function.
Let us see how this works.
Inside the main memory so I will draw diagram of the main memory I will show  you, see we know that
the memory is divided in three sections, that is code section and the stock and heap so
this wording is very very important for you.
Watch it and remember it for always.
See there are two pieces of code so Code section will have the code add function as well as main function.
So the machine code will be also in two pieces, we wrote  it into 2 pieces that will also in 2 pieces
see mostly people believe that the machine code of this add function would be copied at this place, no machine
code will be separate, 2 different pieces will be there.
Now program we are running  so this is there inside this code section.
So the program is loaded in the code section.
Now let us see the working main function start.
The first line sees that it needs variables for ABC of type Integer so memory for A B and C
will be allocated
So these bytes are belonging
The main function, and this we called it as activation record of Main function and A's having value
10 and B's having value 15, see is empty and that is having some garbage value now.
Next there is a call to function add.
So the control goes to add the moment the function is called
Then for this function also activation record is created inside the stock containing all the variables
used here.
X Y and Z.
So X and Y and Z three blocks are created for three variables.
From here what is passed, a and b, so a value goes into x and b value goes into y.
So this 10 goes into this one and 15 goes here.
Now next line this is already done.
This is completed right.
So now Z assign X plus Y.
So these two values are added and 25 is stored here.
Now return z, this line is over, return  Z means this value is copied in C because here if you see this written
value will go into C here whatever the function is returning it will go into c  so C will contain
25.
And once the function ends it reaches here once the function ends it's a memory inside.
The stock will be removed so its activation record is deleted.
So this means we understand that whenever the function is callled the memory for all the variables using
that function is created inside the stack, and when the function ends
All that memory will be cleared automatically, and one more important thing if this function had located
some memory in heap that will not be deallocated automatically.
Function should release it by saying delete, so new if it says and  get the memory in heap it must
be deleted.
So anyway back to this one.
So the function ends now the control come back here.
Now still main function memory variables are there inside the main memory inside the stack now cout
sum c
So here.
Twenty five is displayed and
Function main ends, once the function main ends its activation record or the memory for all those
variables will also be cleared.
So this is how the working the function and we will write many functions.
So practically I will show you some functions and I'll also I'll give you some challenges for writing
some functions.